A Concise Explanation of Gaṇacakra

by Adzom Gyalse Gyurme Dorje

Great universal lord, embodiment of all the families,Glorious teacher, at your feet I bow!

Here, I shall give a concise explanation of the marvellous gaṇacakra, a method for quickly reaching
the fruit of the two accumulations on the basis of the profound and swift path of
the secret mantra Vajrayāna. When gathering the gaṇacakra,[1] all yogins, who have the cause
characterized as knowing, the fortress of the view, and the condition characterized as
engagement, the clearance of the pitfalls of cultivating samādhi, and are skilled in means,
the friend or life-force of the action, should enter the gaṇacakra—the secret conduct—in
order to achieve transcendence.[2] Yogins should thus strive in gaṇacakra one-pointedly for
a multitude of purposes such as actualizing the result. As the omniscient Drimé Özer[3]
stated:

On full moon and new moon, the 8th and the 29th,On the 10th of the waxing moon and the 10th
of the waning moon, at day and at night,Strive in approach and accomplishment; offer the feast,
fulfilment and confession.Wholeheartedly apply the profound key points ofThe yogas such
as the winds, mind, channels, and bindus.Meditating thus on the path of the union of bliss,
clarity and non-thought,One will become a vajradhara and attain perfect buddhahood,
within this life-time.[4]

An overview of gaṇacakra:

its essence
its literal meaning
its divisions

1. Essence of Gaṇacakra

The essence is the perfection of the two accumulations and the bringing of delight and fulfilment
to the deities, the teacher and the vajra-brothers and sisters.

2. Literal Meaning of Gaṇacakra

The word gaṇa means gathering. The All-Illuminating states:

The gathering of the supported (delighted deities), individuals (fortunate disciples), the substances
(abundant feast) and great method (excellent samādhi) is called a secret gathering.[5]

3. Divisions of Gaṇacakra

Regarding its divisions, the Four Seats[6] states:

An assembly of friends is called a gaṇa.By eliminating conceptual thoughts, the cakra is expressed.


The divisions are:

a) outer,
b) inner,
c) secret, and
d) suchness gaṇacakra.

a) Outer Gaṇacakra

The outer gaṇacakra is the accumulation of the feast substances constituting a diversity of
sensory delights.

b) Inner Gaṇacakra

The inner gaṇacakra refers to a gathering of method and wisdom — that is, of vajra brothers
and sisters — in equal number, or in a number that matches the number of deities, or as a
large gathering. The Secret Tantra[7] states:

For the small assembly there are two, six or ten;For the middling, the number of deities in
the maṇḍala;And for the great, even more.

A small gathering comprises the principal male and female; three pairs [six practitioners] symbolizing
enlightened body, speech and mind or five pairs [ten practitioners] representing
the five families. In this way there can be two, six or ten practitioners. For a middling
assembly, the number of practitioners equals the number of deities in the maṇḍala. For a
great assembly, there will be even more practitioners. For these gatherings, pure samaya
amongst the practitioners is of vital importance.

c) Secret Gaṇacakra

The secret gaṇacakra is the offering of the inner feast, with the blazing and dripping,[8] using
method and liberation—the creation and completion practices—to the deities of the three
seats of completeness[9] in the city of the vajra-aggregates, one’s own body.

d) Innermost Gaṇacakra of Suchness

The secret and innermost gaṇacakra, is to take wisdom as the path and transcend the fabrications
of an offering and an offerer. These practices belong to the later completion stages
and should be studied by listening to the nectar-like speech of a master who holds the lineage.
Through them the practitioner gains certainty and brings into experience the oral instructions
that are given according to an individual’s disposition and capacity.

Now, so as to explain primarily the intent of the first two, the outer and the inner gaṇacakra,
there is the preparation, the main part and the conclusion:

I. Preparation

The preparation entails eight branches that should be applied]:

1) The Branch of the Secluded Places

gaṇacakra should be offered in a place that holds the blessings of the buddhas, vidyādharas
or bodhisattvas of the past. Or it should be practiced in a sacred place in which ḍākas and
ḍākinīs assemble, or a place which increases the power of samādhi, experience and realization,
such as in the midst of rocky, snow or forest-covered mountains, pleasure groves, or
places secluded from worldly distractions.

2) The Branch of the Occasion

In such a sacred place, gaṇacakra should be offered in an auspicious year or on an auspicious
month or day or when there is an important event, such as rabné rituals,[10] homa offerings,[11]
the approach and accomplishment practices, initiations, festivals, or thanksgiving
ceremonies.

3) The Branch of the Support, the Individuals

The individuals offering gaṇacakra should include a vajra-master who has accomplished the practices
of approach and accomplishment and has experience and realization, together with an
assembly of vajra-brother and sisters holding the samayas and vows.

4) The Branch of Conducive Friends

The practitioners’ view and conduct has to be in accord with the development and completion
stages of the deity.[12]

5) The Branch of the Deities to Be Accomplished

This entails taking as the support the maṇḍalas of the unsurpassed tantras which are more exalted
than the kriyā-action tantras.

6) The Branch of Skilful Activity

Here, there are six instructions to be followed:

1) Do not perform the ritual of gaṇacakra before having requested and received permission to
do so.[13]2) Do not offer gaṇacakra before having performed the offering mudrā.[14]3) Do
not perform the liberation offering before the first portion has been offered.[15]4) Do not
make offerings to the yogins and yoginīs until the heaps have been arranged.[16]5) Do not
perform the activity, praise and invocation before having offered songs and dance.6) The
yogins and yoginīs should not get up and leave before having offered the remainder.

7) The Branch of Vows and Pledges

The root and branch samayas of the practitioners have to be undefiled.

8) The Branch of the Fruit to Be Attained

The fruit to be attained is the experience of the inexhaustible adornments of the enlightened
body, speech, mind, qualities and activity.

II. The Main Part

The Stages of Vajra Activity[17] states:

When there is a gathering of friends, this is called ‘the gathering of practitioners’. When
all the ingredients are present, this is explained as ‘the gathering of blissful abundance’.
When the deities and dharma protectors are gathered, this is explained to be ‘the gathering
of the great assembly’. This then ensures that the continuous perfection of the two accumulations
will be recognized as ‘the great gathering’.

Here, as stated, there are four points to be applied:

1) The gathering of fortunate ones2) The gathering of wealth and abundance3) The gathering of
delighted deities, and4) The gathering of excellent samādhi

1) The Gathering of Fortunate Ones

The assembled vajra-brothers and sisters constitute ‘the gathering of fortunate ones’. If a
gathering of only men assembles, it is ‘a feast of heroes’. If a gathering of only women assembles,
it is ‘a feast of the heroines’. If both heroes and heroines assemble, it is ‘a
feast of method and wisdom’. If there are only yogins assembled, it is ‘a feast of yogins’.
Generally, it is explained that when both vajra-brothers and vajra-sisters assemble it is
called ‘the gaṇacakra’. Although this is the case, it is nonetheless crucial to check if
it is appropriate to offer gaṇacakra or not. If there are breaches and violations of the
samayas between the master and vajra-brothers and sisters, or if the secret conduct[18] is
beyond someone’s scope, or the participants cling to pure and impure and the like, then it
is inappropriate to offer gaṇacakra. It is thus important to understand what is to be adopted
and what is to be avoided.

2) The Gathering of Wealth and Abundance

In the past, when the yogins and yoginīs gathered the gaṇacakra in sacred places, in India and
elsewhere, the feast substances and articles were worth five hundred sang[19] of gold,
or at least ten sang's worth. Hence, it is important that the feast should be a magnificent
arrangement of valuable, excellent and pure substances. It is stated in the tantras:

Essentials such as dawa,Excellent tastes such as māṃsa,[20]Flowers, sandalwood mālās and more,Please
accept all these excellent offerings!

In particular, the yogins’ view and meditation must be in accord with the feast substances.
This is stated in the Tantra of the Arising of Amṛta:[21]

Nāgas and brahmins eat clean food.That they will be liberated, this I have not explained.Dogs,
pigs and untouchables, eat unclean food.That they will be liberated, this I have not explained.Therefore,
listen to this scripture of definitive meaning!Skilled yoginsExperience
the nature of the distinct five families as the single dharmakāya.Realizing this, one will
be liberated. This I have explained.

This makes it clear that it is crucial for the yogins’ view and conduct to be in harmony.[22]
Thus, when giving offerings to a large assembly, it should be caru foods.[23] Likewise,
the offerings for a rabné ritual should be caru, so should not include impure substances such
as meat, alcohol, garlic and onions. However, when practicing gaṇacakra, the indispensable
substances of method and wisdom are meat and alcohol. As for the meat, unless the animal
suffered for a long time from sickness or famine, or was liberated and guided by a qualified
master, it is impermissible for the meat that is offered to come from an animal killed
specifically for the gaṇacakra. It is best to buy ‘meat that could not be sold nine times’[24]
or else one should buy ‘meat of the three purities’.[25] As for alcohol, unless an
individual has reached the stage of heat[26] and is thus able to purify and transform the
alcohol, it is not permitted to drink such a quantity of alcohol that one’s mindfulness
is impaired. Therefore, only use a very small amount of substances such as meat and alcohol.
Furthermore, offerings may include solids and liquids such as: dagyé (curd and pies), datrom
(confection),[27] tsegal (ritual cakes made from a dough of flour mixed with rice beer
and sweets), māṃsa (meat), kuntugyü (salts), jamdé (condiments),[28] various fruits, dzagé
(alcohol), kang (bone marrow), ladu (vegetables), and yochen (garlic).[29] Arrange whatever
substances you can acquire without judging them as either pure or impure. Except where
they serve as enhancement for the ‘all-victorious conduct’ of supreme yogins, it is stated
that it is inappropriate to add the ‘wolf substances’, such as offerings made by ‘samaya
breakers’ and 'brought by widows.' [30] This gathering of whatever sensory delights one
can acquire constitutes what is called the outer gaṇacakra.

Regarding the musical instruments, it is important to use those that correlate to the activity
performed: for example, conches for peaceful practices, long trumpets for enriching, shawms
for magnetizing and bone trumpets as well as the supreme skull drum for wrathful practices.


When offering gaṇacakra, arrange any sensual delights, such as gold, silver or silk, without
any stinginess or attachment. However, even if the offerings are small, like those of a kuśalin,[31]
it is the visualization and meditation that are most important. Thus, it is stated
that it is sufficient to use the seasonal fruits and vegetables[32] as food and clean
water as drink.

3) The Gathering of Delighted Deities

The gathering of delighted deities is the maṇḍala of whichever deities of the three roots one
relies upon.

4) The Gathering of Excellent Samādhi

Each phase of the ritual should always be accompanied by the Four Gates of the Secret Mantra
Scripture:

1) practicing clearly the generation phase is the gate of the words’ meaning,2) invoking the
iṣṭadevatā(s) is the gate of secret mantra,3) focusing one-pointedly is the gate of samādhi,
and4) using secret signs and symbols is the gate of mudrā.

It is crucial to recollect the purity of deity, mantra, samādhi and mudrā.[33] Hence, the great
Guru of Uḍḍiyāna stated:

Whatever activity, offering or recitation is performed,Non-distracted, with stable samādhi,Do
not just utter the secret mantra’s words like shamans! Evoke the words’ meaning!For practicing
without samādhi is to be like a barking dog.Even though temporarily it might seem like
practice, if without meaning it is like aimlessly wandering about.Thus practice with a
proper posture, speech that is silent, and a mind that is free from discursive thought!Thus,
as it is said, an undistracted visualization is of utmost importance.

Blessing the Feast

There are various ways to bless the feast, but in general one places the substances—the delightful
foods and drinks that were especially prepared for the gaṇacakra—within the feast receptacles,
the kapāla(s) or vast lustrous vessel(s). Then, visualizing oneself as the deity,
from the syllables raṃ, yaṃ and kaṃ in one’s heart, light shoots forth which transforms
into fire, wind and water. The fire of wisdom burns away all grasping at the feast offering
as entities; the wind of clear seeing (vipaśyanā) scatters all grasping thoughts; and
the water of calm abiding (śamatha) washes away all remaining subtle stains of dualistic grasping.
The feast substances are purified into emptiness. Again, they arise vividly as the
samaya substances of the five meats, five amṛtas, immeasurable enjoyments and sensual delights.
Then from the syllables oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ in one’s heart, there shoots forth white, red
and blue light which dissolves into the substances. Imagine that immeasurable syllables
of oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ fill the feast substances. From them light radiates out, inviting the infinite
jñānāmṛta, which dissolves into, and becomes inseparable from, the samayāmṛta. Imagine
that the seed syllables also dissolve into light. In this way, the untainted wisdom of
samaya and jñāna, united becomes great cloud-banks of sensual delights.

Inviting the Deities to the Feast

According to some ritual traditions, there are the following six maṇḍalas: the maṇḍala of the
field of accumulation, the maṇḍala of the blazing periphery,[34] the maṇḍala of restoring
the breakages and impairments, the maṇḍala of the samaya of the generation phase, the maṇḍala
of natural wisdom and the maṇḍala of the delightful gaṇacakra. From among them, here
we are considering the maṇḍala of the delightful gaṇacakra.

Either from both the front-visualization and self-visualization or from one’s heart, inconceivable
light rays shoot forth inviting all the deities residing in the infinite buddha-fields
of the victors’ three kāyas[35]—the gurus, iṣṭadevatās, ḍākinīs, dharmapālas, wealth deities
and treasure guardians—to take their seats in the space in front and join the feast
as our guests.

First Portion of the Feast

Imagine that goddesses of sensual delights are sent out, filling the whole sky. They all carry
in their hands lustrous vessels made of various jewels, all filled with food and drink.
Then, imagine that as many offering substances as there are in the realms of gods and humans,
and as many unique offerings as there are, sprung forth through the aspirations of the
buddhas and bodhisattvas, come to join this feast and are offered as cloud-banks of excellent
offerings to the deities of the maṇḍala. The gathered deities, extremely pleased and
delighted, grant supreme and ordinary siddhis. Other texts explain that, in the manner of
deities dissolving into other deities, the offering goddesses dissolve into the deities’
bodies. Thus, the deities’ body, speech and mind are pleased and the great accumulation is
simultaneously accomplished.

Second Portion of Confession

The offering goddesses each carry a kapāla filled with the five meats and five amṛtas, and particularly
with red and white bodhicitta. Focus on the offering of the great equal taste
of bliss and emptiness. Confess, with strong remorse and regret, any inherently negative deeds
or breakages of vows—impairments, breakages, transgressions or confusions of the vows
of individual liberation, bodhisattva and mantra vehicles—incurred throughout the course
of your lives in beginningless time until now, and ask for forgiveness. Imagine that the assembled
deities are delighted and, filled with love, grant forgiveness. All shortcomings
and flaws are purified without exception and the impairments[36] in relation to the wisdom
deities are restored. Thus, gain firm confidence that in this way the four primordially protected
king-like samayas[37] are actualized.

Third portion, the Liberation Offering

When the third portion feast substance is placed before the vajra-master, he or she recites
“hūṃ”. Thus, the goddesses who previously blessed the sensual delights dissolve back into
oneself. The third portion should not be be sanctified with the consecrated water, alcohol,
or ‘inner offering’.[38] It is said that if one has a liberation effigy, one should place
the third portion within it and move both to the side.[39] In any case, sprinkle that third
portion which has captured the life-force(s) with non-consecrated rakta. A realized being
who has liberated the self performs ‘The Buddhas’ Instructions from the Mantrika’s Triangular
Ritual Fire Pit’[40] to the beings that are captured in the effigy, such as those
who show all the ten grounds,[41] those who have committed the seven violations,[42] or those
who belong to the five kinds of enemies,[43] all of whom are to be liberated by others
with compassion. Through the vajra-master’s samādhi which fulfils the three satisfactions[44]
by being stable, powerful and focused,[45] the mind is separated from the body. Then,
the ‘flesh and blood’[46] is consecrated with amṛta and becomes undefiled wisdom nectar,
which in turn is offered. Imagine that the deities enjoy this with delightful and wrathful
expressions. All dualistic thoughts, the root of impure saṃsāra, are released into the expanse
of great non-dual bliss. Thus sustaining the samādhi of the primordial purity of the
three worlds[47] is the single key point which perfects all offerings of union and liberation
and confession and fulfilment.

Some scriptures explain that the first portion is offered to the general bali[48] of the three
roots; the second portion of confession to the bali of the ḍākinīs; and the third portion
of liberation near the malign bali of the lower activities or, if one does not have this
bali, to the bali of the protectors. In another tradition one would offer the first portion
to the three roots’ bali and the second and third portions—the confession and liberation
offerings—near the bali of the lower activity. One can also offer all three portions near
the three roots’ bali. If it is not easy to offer the three portions near the balis, then
it is permitted to simply offer the individual feast plates or the whole feast into in
one big bowl. When one performs the fulfilment for the liberation offering, visualize the
fulfilment substances through the key points of deity, mantra, mudrā and samādhi, as Samantabhadra’s
vast offering clouds continuously filling the whole expanse of space. Evoke the
meaning of each and every word of the ritual manual of whatever feast-offering one follows.
If the ritual includes a ‘sky-offering portion’, offer this fourth portion outside the
shrine room. If the ritual liturgy does not mention the fourth portion, then it is not necessary
to offer a substitution.[49]

Next, the ritual assistant(s) distributes the feast to the entire assembly, beginning with the
vajra-master. The ritual assistant begins with prostrations and then, with his or her left
hand in the 'lotus mudrā' and holding the madana,[50] and with his or her right in the
'three-pointed mudrā', he or she recites:

Kyé! Behold all phenomena as excellent! Do not entertain doubts regarding all that is gathered.
Eat, regarding brahmins, dogs, and untouchables as having the same nature![51]

The ritual assistant, with arms crossed, holds the substances of skilful means and wisdom and
gives them to the vajra-master. The vajra master, with left hand in the 'lotus mudrā'; and
right hand in the 'three-pointed mudrā' (thumb pressing on the little finger and remaining
three fingers extended), takes the feast. It is also permitted that the vajra-master,
having performed the 'lotus mudrā', takes the feast with both hands joined. Moreover, do not
simply start to eat and drink in an ordinary way. Instead, distribute the substances to
the assembly without favour or dislike. And do not engage in mindless entertainment such
as making jokes. Also, do not be selective about which feast substances one receives. Regarding
the downfall of the hawk or wolf-like behaviour, the great Guru of Uḍḍiyāna said:

If one has craving and is greedy for the feast, one will be reborn as a wolf.If one does not
know how to enjoy the feast while maintaining the three perceptions, one will be reborn a
hungry ghost with a tightly closed mouth.

The three perceptions are:

perception of the teacher as the heruka in union,perception of one's vajra-brothers and sisters
as gods and goddesses,perception of the gaṇacakra as the siddhis.

Furthermore, it is said that there should be six satisfactions:

to satisfy the deities of the field of accumulation with outer, inner and secret offerings,to
satisfy the yogins and yoginīs with foods and drinks,to satisfy the wisdom maṇḍala with
the essence of amṛta,to satisfy the deities of the body maṇḍala with the wisdom of bliss and
emptiness,to satisfy the outer and inner ḍākinīs with the offering of songs, andto satisfy
the haughty spirits with the bali.

Thus, delight in the outer, inner and secret gaṇacakra and, as stated in the great tantra, The
Union of the Sun and Moon:[52]

Perform the vajra song and dance!

Therefore chant the feast songs,[53] Ema Kiri[54] and so forth. Moreover, uphold the three ‘inseparables’:


the body is inseparable from the iṣṭadevatā,the speech is in essence inseparable from mantra,
andthe mind is inseparable from dharmatā.

The three freedoms from doubt are:

to be free from doubts regarding the tantras, scriptures and the teacher’s speech,to be free
from the doubts over purity and impurity regarding the maṇḍala of siddhis, andto be free
from doubts regarding the secret conduct.

The three prohibitions:

do not engage in careless conduct,do not harbour desire, anger or jealously, anddo not sow disharmony
amongst ones vajra-brothers and sisters.

The three inappropriate concepts regarding meat and alcohol:

although one may be a bhikṣu, it is inappropriate to harbour concepts,although one may be a
brahmin adhering to purity, it is inappropriate to harbour concepts, andalthough one may be
a follower of the kriyā-action tantras, learned in ritual, it is inappropriate to harbour
concepts.

The three types of accumulating negativity to be avoided:

do not accumulate negativity towards the guide, one’s teacher(s),do not accumulate negativity
towards the oral instructions of the profound path, anddo not accumulate negativity towards
friends on the path, one’s vajra brothers and sisters

The three things that should not be given to the public:

do not give out the supports for initiations such as sindūra to the public,do not give out one’s
portion of the feast—the support of the blessings—to the public, anddo not give out the
amṛta of accomplishment to the public.

The three secrets are:

the secret of the time when the gaṇacakra is to be performed,the secret of the arrangement of
the gaṇacakra, andthe secret of the method of performance.

The three utterances to be avoided:

do not utter disrespectful words towards one’s teacher(s),do not utter ordinary words during
the gaṇacakra, anddo not utter harsh words towards ones vajra-brothers and sisters.

Giving the Remainder Offering

According to the elaborate explanation, it is best to arrange heaps of human ash upon the skin
of a violator.[55] The second best option is to sprinkle the grains or sand maṇḍala with
scented water and rakta. At least, arrange five piles of grains upon whatever support one
has. Or, as the Heruka Galpo states:

Within the maṇḍala of the remainder at the north-eastern border,Draw with rakta E’s or crescents
upon a ‘violator’s skin’.

As stated, additionally in the maṇḍala in the north-east or south-west, draw for the peaceful
deities a circular maṇḍala with scented water, and draw for the wrathful deities upon violator’s
skin a dharmodaya,[56] and a crescent upon a violator’s skin.

In any case, place a bhāṇḍa[57] or a copper vessel upon a stand. If you desire mainly pacifying
activity, place the pure remainder within the vessel. If you desire mainly wrathful activity,
place the impure remainder within the vessel. The recitation, visualisation and so
forth [for the ritual] are hidden elsewhere and I shall not explain them here. As before,
collect the impure remainder from the whole assembly. However, if it collecting the impure
remainder is difficult because too many samaya-holders have assembled, then it is permissible
not to collect the impure remainder. In brief, it is explained that the impure remainder
is gathered beginning from the ends of the lines and it is excellent if each impure remainder
is placed in separate vessels. According to the tradition of my most precious teacher,[58]
this kind advice is given:

The pure remainder is placed upon the impure remainder of the vajra-master. Upon this is placed
‘the palgyi pabab’ – the leftover pieces of the previous offerings.[59] It is important
to include an incense stick during the day and a burning candle at night, in order to avoid
a direct encounter[60] with the remainder guests.

Some maṇḍala rituals advise that the remainder should be held aloft while the words of the remainder
offering are recited. The pure remainder is divided and offered, except for one portion,
to the maṇḍala. The remaining portion is placed and used as the pure remainder as
explained above. In general, the ritual assistant sprinkles it with amṛta and rakta. In order
to avoid being poisoned by an encounter with the remainder guests,[61] the 'lotus mudrā'
should be performed and the remainder held with the 'garuḍa mudrā'.

If a vajra-master with realization of the view is present, some scriptures explain that each
of the five families should be performed, but according to the tradition of my precious most
teacher, the vajra-master should visualize his or her upper palate as vīra Hayagrīva and
his or her lower palate as Vajravārāhī. Then, he or she visualizes that, from their point
of union, the mind of awakening which has the nature of amṛta, and blesses the remainder
by spitting three times with the 'secret space mudrā'. The first spit purifies all the faults
and defects; the second transforms the remainder into the nature of untainted amṛta;
and the third transforms it into enjoyments of sensual delights which multiply inexhaustibly.

If the vajra-master does not hold the highest view, the remainder is sprinkled with amṛta. Were
one to spit on it, this would be comparable to the guard contaminating clean food:[62]
it would lead the ḍākinīs to command harsh retribution.

Visualize the remainder feast receptacle as a kapāla or a vast and extensive lustrous vessel
bubbling with wisdom amṛta. Imagine within it a variety of outer and inner offerings, such
as silken tents, canopies and ribbons, flesh, blood and bones, all of which transform into
inexhaustible clouds of offerings that delight the wisdom and worldly invited remainder
guests. The remainder guests are those of the seven higher and lower ranks. Those of the
seven higher ranks are as stated in the Heruka Galpo:

those that reside in the spontaneously perfect abode of the naturally pure dharmadhātu, andthose
of the ranks of the heruka, who are blessed by samādhi and become the object of visualization,the
male, skilful means,the female, wisdom,the khrodīs of the places,the piśacīs
of the lands, andthe maṇḍala of the four wisdom gate keepers.

Those of the seven lower ranks are:

the thirty-two ḍākinīs mentioned in the Secret Moon-Drop,the eighteen great kiṃkaras mentioned
in the Yamāntaka teachings,the three rākṣasas mentioned in the Śrī Heruka teachings,the
eight jvālas mentioned in the unsurpassed Māyājāla teachings,the seven mātṛkās and the four
bhaginīs mentioned in the mother tantras and scriptures,the sixty-four dūtīs mentioned
in the Mighty Lotus, andthe twenty-eight īśvarīs mentioned in the Guhyagarbha to whom both
the pure and impure remainder are offered.

Know that all these spirits and deities vary in the appearance of their bodies, faces, hands
and characteristics.

The ritual assistant, counting steps of both right and left legs, walks seventy steps away from
the practice place. This is called the ‘feeding pathway of the rakṣasas’. There he or
she places the remainder heaped like a stand. Although there are various ways to pile the
remainder, they are not explained here. Other texts also suggest making an offering of rinsing
water. According to my kind teacher, in order not to be poisoned, within the shrine room
and while holding the bali-plate, so that the plate faces oneself, pour rinsing water
onto it.[63]

During a drupchen,[64] the lhakta, ‘the promised remainder’, is placed in the south-east of
the maṇḍala, because that is where the ḍākinīs gather. Generally, it is also said to be placed
in the north-east of the maṇḍala. On the day that the remainder is given, the collected
remainder is placed altogether as a pile outside.

It is said that a scattered remainder will cause quarrels to arise among vajra-brothers and
sisters. Do not give the remainder to beggars and the like, since this is said to lead to
inauspiciousness within the country. There is no fault, however, if the remainder is eaten
by birds, since they belong to the family of ḍākinīs. It is explained that one should immediately
dissolve the visualized remainder maṇḍala once the remainder has been offered. Taking
good care of these points regarding the remainder will ensure that the many fierce mundane
and super-mundane deities invited to the remainder do not create inauspicious circumstances
for you, the ritual assistant, the assembly or the nation.

Exhortation

Exhort the deities to take their previously taken samayas seriously. Recite the summoning liturgy
for the bali and visualize, while maintaining the three satisfactions, that the offering
of flesh and blood transforms into amṛta.

Covenant

The covenant is given to the protectors of the three classes of tantras who follow the command
of the three kāya teacher(s). Thus, through the giving of the covenant, the protectors
are entrusted with the activities of aiding the dharma brothers and sisters and pacifying
their obstacles. Pour the rinsing water for the covenant near the bali of the sthāvarās.

Sthāvarās[65]

The sthāvarā goddesses, as previously commanded by Padmasambhava, are entrusted with the four
activities,[66] such as the protection of Tibet against the threats of heretics and barbarians.
In order to avoid angering the sthāvarās, visualize a white silken curtain surrounding
the sthāvarā offering.

Suppression Dance

In order to suppress the hidden retinue of ghost and spirits, it is crucial that you place the
seal while maintaining the view of the inseparability of emptiness and compassion.

Again, recite the offering, praise and confession prayers. Then receive the siddhis, dissolve
and re-emerge, dedicate and recite aspirations and prayers of auspiciousness. Here, I shall
not explain the individual visualisations for these practices.

III. Showing the Excellent Benefits of Gathering the gaṇacakra

It is stated in The Two Segments:[67]

Whatever one eats, all the sensual delightsFor the practitioners will transform into siddhis.


As it is said:[68]

The faults of the transgressions of samaya will be dispelled,Everything unfavourable will be
defeated,One will accomplish whatever one desires,One will gather the accumulation of merit,All
food will bestow siddhis,The remainder deities and spirits will be satisfied.Through
the ritual of the gaṇacakra,Which swiftly grants the prophecy for receivingThe siddhi of
mahāmudrā,One will reach the desired goal.

The Vajra-Net[69] states:

Amongst the accumulations of merit, gaṇacakra is supreme.All one's wishes for this life will
be accomplished,Negative forces and obstacles will be pacified.In the next, in the realm
of the victorious vidyādharas,One will reach the level of Samantabhadra.

The Saṃvarodaya[70] states:

Abundant happiness,Freedom from disease, a virtuous mind,[All] wishes will be fulfilled and
final release will be attained.Thus abundant siddhis will be gathered.

The Naturally Arisen Perfection Tantra states:[71]

The qualities of gaṇacakra are as follows:The obscurations of countless past and future livesWill
all be purified in a mere instant in the presence of the peaceful and wrathful deities.Wherever
one is born in lives to comeOne will never lack necessities,The wheel of Dharma
will never cease to turn for youAnd one will always have abundant wealth, enjoyments,Sustenance
and belongings.These are the temporary benefits.There are also the higher qualities
that one will receive:In the intermediate state, one will recognize one’s own perception
as the wisdoms.[72]Being liberated there, one will remain on the unchanging ground,Sending
forth emanations throughout the three thousand-fold universeTo benefit beings.Qualities
like this one will attain!

Yeshé Tsogyal said:

On the tenth of the waxing moon and on the tenth of the waning moon,On the eighth and the fifteenth,[73]Gather
the gaṇacakra and make offerings.Offering the gaṇacakra merely once will
close the doors to the lower realms,And you will not even return and take birth as a human
again.Understand that this can be established with certainty, through logic.

And, the eminent scholar Padma Legdrub[74] said:

In essence, therefore, the qualities of performing the gaṇacakra are immeasurable. Through it,
you will perfect the activities of pacifying, enriching, magnetizing and subjugating. You
will restore all impairments and breakages of samaya. You will delight and satisfy the
deities, gurus, oath-bound protectors, and vajra brother and sisters. All unfavourable and
unwanted circumstances will be dispelled. You will perfect the two accumulations of merit
and wisdom. You will simultaneously accomplish supreme and ordinary siddhis. Through this,
you will obtain benefits too vast to describe. Since this is the special, profound circumstance,
the condition and method of secret mantra, the unsurpassable vajrayāna, I urge you
to strive continuously with diligence!

And, Machik Labdrön said:

Amongst all the conditioned virtues, there is no greater merit than gathering the gaṇacakra.Gathering
the gaṇacakra once, one will be liberated from the age of famine.[75]Gathering the
gaṇacakra twice, one will become a universal monarch of the thousand-fold universe.Gathering
the gaṇacakra thrice, one will attain the supreme and ordinary siddhis.Gathering the
gaṇacakra for a fourth time, attaining the stages of the herukas, one will spontaneously
accomplish the twofold benefit,And one will travel unobstructedly to the buddha-fields. Thus
the benefits are immeasurable!

Longchenpa said:[76]

Its excellent benefits are as follows:The accumulations of merit and wisdom will be perfected,All
transgressions of the samayas will be restored,Assemblies of ḍākas and ḍākinīs will
come and gather in the places of the practitioners and accomplish the activities,The masters
and the gathering of the deities of the maṇḍala will be delighted,The ocean of samaya-bound
guardians will guard and protect you,Your current life will be long, without disease,You
will enjoy renown and a vast gathering of helpers and enjoyments.Whatever you wish for
will be effortlessly and spontaneously accomplished.The supreme and ordinary siddhis will
be attained.All obstacles and negativities will be purifiedAnd thus, in a future life, you
will attain unsurpassable awakening.Like this you will obtain unthinkable and unspeakable
qualities!

Whatever merit may arise from this composition, I dedicate to sentient beings throughout space!May
all sentient beings thus perfectly attain the result of the two accumulations!Whatever
shortcomings there may be, due to confusion,I admit and confess, with the omniscient ones
as my witness!

At the earnest requests of my disciple, the learned monk and scholar Drakyab Sherab[77] and
others, I, Gyurme Dorje, wrote this text at Tashi Gephel Ling.[78] May virtue and goodness
abound!

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2018. Many thanks to Gyalse Tulku Rinpoche, Tulku Rigdzin Pema
Rinpoche, Drokpa Tulku, Lama Öpak, Khenpo Tsöndru Zangpo, Khenpo Pema Namgyal, James Gentry,
Adam Pearcey, Han Kop, Peter Woods and Kaleb Yaniger for kindly providing suggestions and
clarifications. Edited by David Teasdale and Libby Hogg.