Essence of Accomplishment: An Extremely Concise Feast-Offering to Noble Tārā
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Namo guru ārya-tārāyai
If you wish to offer a feast to the deities of Noble Tārā, after you have completed the preliminary
stages of your practice, sprinkle the feast articles, particularly the samaya substances
of skilful means and wisdom, with cleansing water and amṛta.
ram yam kham
raṃ yaṃ khaṃ
yeshe riktsal mé lung chü
Fire, wind and water—the display of awareness—
tsokdzé ngödzin sek tor jang
Burn, scatter and wash away reification of the feast substances.
bhendé nö du dütsi chü
Within a skull-cup, the amṛta nectar transforms
döyön gyatsö pungpor gyur
Into an ocean of sensual delights:
om ah hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ
hrih womin chöying podrang dang
Hrīḥ! From the dharmadhātu palace of Akaniṣṭha,
lerab köpa longkü shying
From the saṃbhogakāya field Array of Supreme Activity,
né sum trulpé kyilkhor né
And from the nirmāṇakāya-maṇḍala of the three places,1
damtsik drolma naljorma
Samaya Tārā Yoginī,
tsa sum gyatsö khor dangché
Together with an ocean of deities of the three roots,
tsok kyi duwar chendren shek
We invite you, please come and join this feast-gathering.
longchö nampa tamché pé
We offer you this delightful wisdom amṛta,
yeshe dütsi nyé chö bul
Lavish and replete.
dikdrib nyetung tol shying shak
We openly admit and confess our misdeeds, obscurations, faults and downfalls.
zungdzin toktsok ying su drol
Liberate all dualistic thoughts into the expanse of reality!
choktün trinlé ngödrub tsol
Bestow the supreme and common activities and siddhis!
om guru arya taré sapariwara sarva gana tsatra pudza ho
oṃ guru ārya-tārā-sarva-saparivāra-gaṇacakra-pūjā hoḥ
Then, recite the Hundred-Syllable Mantra:
om benza sato samaya manupalaya benza sato tenopa tishta dridho mé bhava sutokhayo mé bhava
supokhayo mé bhava anurakto mé bhava sarva siddhi mé prayaccha sarva karma su tsa mé tsittam
shreyang kuru hung ha ha ha ha ho bhagavan sarva tatagata benza ma mé muntsa benzi bhava
maha samaya sato ah
oṃ vajrasattva samayam anupālaya vajrasattva-tvenopa-tiṣṭha dṛḍho me bhava sutoṣyo me
bhava supoṣyo me bhava anurakto me bhava sarva-siddhiṃ me prayaccha sarva-karma śuca me cittaṃ
śreyaṃ-kuru hūṃ ha ha ha ha hoḥ bhagavān sarva-tathāgata-vajra mā me muñca vajrī-bhava
mahā-samaya-sattva āḥ
Gather the remainder and consecrate it with:
om a hung ho
oṃ āḥ hūṃ hoḥ
Summon the guests with:
pem, kyilkhor chir nyul drekpé tsok
Pheṃ! Hosts of arrogant sprits roaming outside this maṇḍala,
ngön gyi damtsik jishyin du
In accord with your previously taken samayas,
lhakmé chöpa bul gyi shyé
Accept and enjoy this remainder offering.
om utsita balingta khahi
oṃ ucchiṣṭa-baliṅta khāhi
Thus, dedicate the remainder.
jetsün pakmé lhatsok la
Through this marvellous offering
mejung chöpa pulwa yi
To the assembly of the Noble Lady,
sönam yeshe tsok dzok né
Having completed the accumulations of merit and wisdom
ngödrub nam nyi nyur tob shok
May we swiftly attain the two accomplishments.
Thus, make aspirations. Then, make offerings, praises, supplications, and confess mistakes.
If you have a practice support, request the deities to remain; if you do not, request them
to depart. Then, recite prayers of dedication, aspiration and auspiciousness as usual.

This was written by Mañjughoṣa. Virtue! Maṅgalaṃ!

| Translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (Laura Dainty, Stefan Mang and Ryan Conlon), 2018.
Revised with many thanks to Charles Hastings, 2021.
↑ This refers to the nirmāṇakāya maṇḍala formed by the eight great charnel grounds, twenty-four
sacred sites and thirty-two sacred lands. The maṇḍala thus consists of sixty-four sacred
sites in which ḍākiṇīs are said to abide.