Short Tsok Offering to the Powerful Lady Kurukullā
by Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo

ram yam kham, tsokdzé sha nga dütsi nga
Raṃ yaṃ khaṃ! The tsok substances of the five meats and five nectars,
yeshe nam nga shyuwé chü
The elixirs derived from the melting of the five wisdoms,
khadok dri ro nüpé ter
Are a treasury of perfect colour, smell, taste, and potency,
döyön trinpung trowar gyur
Sending out vast clouds of sensory delights.
om ah hung ha ho hrih
oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ
hrih, rikdak lama öpakmé
Hrīḥ! Guru Amitābha, lord of the family,
yidam wangchen tachok pal
Glorious and powerful yidam deity Hayagrīva,
khyepar khandro gyatsö tso
And in particular the consort Kurukullā, chief of infinite ḍākinīs:
drenpé khordé püntsok kün
By thinking of you, all the abundance of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa
wang dzé kurukullé yum
Is brought under our power.
bumtrak yangpé daki dang
Hundreds of thousands of ḍākinīs,
lhachen mahadeva yab
The consort—the great god Mahādeva—
tsünmo umadewi sok
Goddess Umadevī and all others
rabjam wang gi kakhor kün
In the infinite magnetizing retinue:
dir shek tsok kyi chöpa shyé
Come here and enjoy this tsok offering!
sishyi döyön gyatsö trin
With infinite clouds of sensory delights of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
namkha dzö kyi tukdam kang
This treasury as vast as the sky, may your wishes be fulfilled!
damtsik nyamchak nyetung shak
I confess my impairments, breakages, mistakes and downfalls of samaya!
tenyö güpa malü sol
Dispel all degenerations of the world and beings!
lek tsok yönten tamché dang
Bring all that is of benefit, all happiness and all good qualities,
khyepar mikyul nying tsa gul
Without impediment, under our power.
tokpa mepar wang du dü
And in particular, move the heart channel of our object of focus,
dakchak tsesö paljor pel
Increase our lifespan, merit and prosperity,
lé shyi drub gyé wang chu sok
And cause the four enlightened activities, the eight accomplishments, the ten powers,
choktün ngödrub char tar pob
And the ordinary and supreme siddhis to descend like rain!
om guru déwa dakini kurukullé sapariwara sarva ganachakra pudza ho | maha balingta khahi
oṃ guru-deva-ḍākinī-kurukullā-sarva-saparivāra-gaṇacakra-pūjā hoḥ | mahā-baliṅta khāhi |
Recite the hundred syllable mantra
Remainder
hrih, kyilkhor nyenpö takyongwa
Hrīḥ! Guardians of the priceless maṇḍala’s boundary,
lhak la wangwa drekpé tsok
Hosts of arrogant ones who own the remainder,
dir shek zatung tsoklhak shyé
Come here and accept this tsok remainder of food and drink.
naljor cholpé trinlé dzö
Carry out the activity entrusted by the yogis!
utsita balingta khahi
uccita baliṅ te khāhi
Aspiration
wangdzé khandrö lhatsok la
By making desirable offerings
döyön chöpa pulwa yi
To the gathering of magnetizing ḍākinīs,
lungsem nangwa wang du dü
Wind energy, mind and perception are brought under our power.
dechen yeshe drubpar shok
May we accomplish the wisdom of great bliss!
Maṅgalam!

Although the colophon is illegible, since this was copied from the unmistakable handwriting
of the lord guru Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo, it is certainly his own composition.