The Gaṇacakra Ritual

by Sakya Paṇḍita

With devotion I prostrate to my noble teacher!

Bowing to my teacher,The single embodiment of all the buddhas,To bring accomplishment of the
accumulations of merit and wisdom,I shall explain the ritual which does so.

If you wish to perform the gaṇacakra taught in the niruttarayoga tantras—the highest yoga tantras—such
as those of the tathāgatas Śrī Hevajra or Śrī Cakrasaṃvara, there are three points:

I. How to perform the ritualII. The refutation of objectionsIII. The divisions of the ritual


I. How to Perform the Ritual

First, the manner in which the ritual is performed consists of six points:

Time
Place
Fellow practitioners
Substances
The ritual itself
Necessity

1. Time

a) Periodic occasions
b) Special occasions

a) Periodic Occasions

These fall on the eighth, tenth, fourteenth and fifteenth days of the waxing and waning moon.

b) Special Occasions

These occur when empowerments are given, during a consecration, when a fire offering is performed
or when the tantras are taught.

2. Place

A beginner performs the ritual in places hidden from those who have not received the empowerment,
such as in one's own home or a shrine room. Those who have stabilized their minds perform
the ritual in such places as charnel grounds or sacred mountain caves. Those who have
reached accomplishment perform the ritual in locations such as the twenty-four sacred places.

3. Fellow Practitioners

One’s fellow practitioners should be vīras and yoginīs[1] who have received the empowerment
and have not broken their samayas.

4. Substances

Although the substances consist of whatever articles you are able to acquire, the indispensable
substances for the wisdom ḍākinīs are madana and bala.[2]

5. The Ritual

The ritual is divided into three parts:

a) The preparation
b) The main part
c) The conclusion

a) The Preparation

The preparation consists of six points:

i. Decoration of the practice placeii. Arrangement of the outer and inner offering articlesiii.
Invitation of the vajra master to come and preside over the ceremonyiv. Communication
through secret hand-gestures for entering the placev. Performance of the deity yoga and requesting
the deities to take their seatsvi. Recitation of the hundred-syllable mantra for
purifying the mind

i. Decoration of the Practice Place

First, clean the practice place. Then anoint it with the five substances of a cow, sprinkle
scented water, hang canopies and flower garlands, and set up a painting of the deities. If
the focus of the practice lies mainly on the self-visualization, in accordance with the number
of deities of the self-visualization, such as of Hevajra or Cakrasaṃvara, arrange seats
covered with tiger-skins or charnel ground shrouds. If you do not have these it is fine
to arrange other appropriate seats. Arrange the seats in a circle according to how the deities
are seated within the maṇḍala.

If the focus lies mainly on the front-visualization, arrange an accomplishment maṇḍala, as taught
in the traditional scriptures such as the Hevajra or Cakrasaṃvara. With the vajra master
taking the principal seat of the assembly, the other practitioners sit according to seniority.
The practice focusing mainly on the self-visualization is taught in The Two Segments.[3]
The practice focusing on mainly the front-visualization is taught in such scriptures
as the Sampuṭa-tantra[4] and elsewhere. It is said that it is easier for beginners to
offer the feast mainly to the front-visualization.

ii. Arrangement of the Outer and Inner Offering Articles

According to Hevajra three or four water offerings should be arranged. According to the Cakrasaṃvara,
the water offerings can be confined to the two for drinking and washing the hands
and feet. Here, the additional water offerings are part of the arranged offerings.[5] Thus
when you recite "we present the offerings (... chöpar bul)," all the water offerings are
included within the arranged offerings.

When you offer the four waters: first, mix the water for washing the hands and feet with pleasant
smelling substances such as camphor and saffron; second, mix the water for washing the
face with the three sweets; third, prepare clean water for drinking; and, fourth, decorate
the offering water with white flowers. Then prepare whatever you can afford for the remaining
five offerings of the flowers and so forth. Arrange the shrine as elaborately as possible.

According to the traditional scriptures of Hevajra and Cakrasaṃvara, you should place one torma
for the supermundane deities, one torma for the primary mundane dharmapālas, and one torma
for the local deities. If required you can also arrange further tormas. If you can afford
the expense, the more abundantly you can arrange the shrine, the better.

Next, fill the padma-bhājana[6] with madana and place it in front of you with the skull's forehead
facing you. Place the samaya implements of vajra and bell in order, to the right and
left before you. Arrange, too, whatever delightful articles you are able to acquire. Take
care of all these necessities as the preliminary to the following steps.

iii. Invitation of the Vajra Master

Offer as many maṇḍalas and flowers to the vajra master as you can and request the following:

Please preside as the vajra master over this assembly to perform this offering of all the mundane
and supermundane for the benefit of all sentient beings.

If you make offerings primarily to the self-visualization, the vajra master sits upon a specially
prepared seat in the centre of the assembly. When emphasizing the front-visualization,
the vajra master sits upon a specially prepared seat at the head of the assembly.

iv. Communication through Secret Hand Gestures for Entering the Place

With the vajra pride of being Nīladaṇḍa,[7] the ritual assistant holds the activity vase and
remains at the entrance to the practice place. By communicating through secret signs with
the initiated, he is able to identify those who are unqualified to enter and send them away.[8]
In order to gain entrance the initiated then recite the following verse together:

Dark blue ferocious one, your conduct according to the samayas is splendid! Holder of the bejewelled
staff of accomplishment, let us heroes and heroines gather! Let us enter the circle
of celestial yoginīs![9]

Then, the guard, Nīladaṇḍa, cleanses them with the water from the activity vase and replies:

Behold all phenomena as excellent!Have no doubts regarding all that is gathered.Eat and regard
brahmins, dogs, and untouchablesAs equal in nature![10]

Having recited the verse, the guard then grants access. Since it is difficult to perform this
entrance ritual correctly and it can reduce the power of the main ritual if done incorrectly,
should the participants lack sufficient knowledge, they can simply arouse the pride
of being the deity and mindfully enter the practice place. Then once the vajra master has
taken his seat first, the other practitioners follow according to seniority.

v. Invocation

The ritual assistant offers the general maṇḍala and places flowers in the hands of those assembled.
Prostrating with joined hands, he recites:

With great cloud-like offerings of Samantabhadra's magical display, we vīras and yoginīs make
offerings in order to pacify obstacles for the benefactors and gather the two accumulations.
Please preside over us, therefore, in non-dual samādhi.

It is also possible to recite the abbreviated request: "Please preside over us within the yoga
of your main deity." Following this, the ritual assistant collects the flowers again and
offers them to the teacher. The teacher in turn offers them to the lineage masters and yidam
deities, then places the flowers in the centre of the maṇḍala.

vi. Purifying the Mind

In order for the assembly to confess breakages of samaya, meditate on Vajrasattva on the crown
of your head and recite an appropriate number of hundred-syllable mantras, according to
the pith instructions. Then recite the following words from the Abhidhāna:[11]

In my ignorance and delusionI have gone against and corrupted my samaya.Guru, protector, be
my refuge!Chief of all the maṇḍalas, vajra holder,Embodiment of great compassion,Chief of
all living beings, in you I take refuge!

b) Main Part

The main part consists of the sixfold satisfaction. According to the explanatory tradition of
the embodiment of all the mahāyoga tantras, the Sampuṭa-tantra, these are:

i. To satisfy the samādhi-maṇḍala with vast offeringsii. To satisfy the wisdom deity in the
heart with the taste of amṛtaiii. To satisfy the outer hordes of spirits with the tormaiv.
To satisfy the samaya-holders, the vīras and yoginīs, with the inner fire offeringv. To satisfy
the outer and inner ḍākinīs with offerings of songs and dancevi. To satisfy the body
maṇḍala with co-emergent wisdom

i. Satisfying the Samādhi-Maṇḍala with Vast Offerings

According to the Hevajra, you should begin the practice by following the extensive or condensed
visualization for the invitation of the field of merit until the protection circle. Among
the ten topics,[12] in order to carry out the branches of protection and averting, recite
the uṣnīṣā-mantra[13] as many times as possible. The mantra will grant protection from
obstacles now and create the auspicious conditions for overpowering the māras on the eve
of your awakening. According to the Cakrasaṃvara, we simply meditate on the protection circle,
and it is not necessary to recite the mantra at this point. Next, meditate gradually
on the development and completion phases according to whichever ritual text you follow, such
as the Hevajra or the Cakrasaṃvara.

Then, focus on reciting the respective root, heart, and quintessence mantras of the main deity,
and recite the mantras of their retinue as many times as you can. Through practicing the
development and completion stages together with the mantra recitation you will accomplish
the accumulation of merit and wisdom at the time of the cause, purify buddha-fields, ripen
sentient beings, and purify the negative tendencies of body, speech and mind which cause
rebirth in the lower realms. You will thus set the auspicious conditions for attaining
the three or four kāyas and create the auspicious conditions for attaining awakening in Akaniṣṭha,
and for accomplishing the benefit of sentient beings with immeasurable emanations
in countless realms at the time of the fruition. This is how to cultivate the samādhi-maṇḍala.

Regarding the satisfaction of the samādhi-maṇḍala with vast offerings: according to the Hevajra,
first, recite "oṃ vajrāmṛta-kuṇḍali hana hana hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ," and sprinkle the madana
with the tip of the vajra in order to purify the physically arranged outer offerings. According
to the Cakrasaṃvara, imagine purifying the offerings with the 'śumbha-ni mantra'[14]
and dissolving all objects—the offerings, the practitioner(s) who offer(s) them and the act
of offering—into emptiness with the 'svabhāva mantra'.[15] Then, imagine that out of emptiness
the previous concepts of the offerings, the practitioner(s) who offer(s) them and
the act of offering, now arise in the form of the deity like a dream-like, magical display.
Imagine all these offerings as arisen from the virtue of both the mundane and supermundane,
excellent, clean, pure, unobstructed, filling the sky entirely, and continuously appearing
for as long as saṃsāra remains.

Now offer them with mantra, samādhi and mudrā as taught in the tantras. Using mantras and mudrās
that are not taught in the tantras would render the ritual impure, with the result that
the buddhas would not delight in your offerings. If you wish to delight the buddhas, you
must use the actual words spoken by the buddhas. Then consecrate the inner offerings of
amṛta just as you did with the torma. Sprinkle the inner offerings with the left thumb and
ring-finger and offer them first to your root teacher, then to the lineage master and the
yidam deities. Next, offer them to the dharmapālas, spirits and so forth while reciting the
individual mantras of the respective deities.

ii. Satisfying the Wisdom Deity in the Heart with the Taste of Amṛta

With your ring finger put a drop of amṛta on the tip of your tongue, between your eyebrows and
on the crown of your head while reciting:[16]

To each yoginī in turn,The yogin makes offeringsWith a sprinkle of the thumb.Visualizing the
yoginīs in the three places of his bodyThe clever yogin makes offeringsTo the tip of the
tongue, the bindu, and above.

According to the Hevajra, you then ring the bell and recite offerings and praises, such as,
"Picturing him, the venerable one, in the sky above...,"[17] the offering of the eight goddesses,
the praise beginning with "All you yoginīs who have gathered in this gaṇacakra...,"[18]
and The Praise in Twenty Verses.[19] According to the Cakrasaṃvara, you recite offerings
and praises, such as The Praise to the Buddhas in the Ten Directions,[20] the praise
by master Bhūri,[21] and The Eight-Part Root Mantra of the Tathāgata.[22] To avoid confusion,
I shall not go into more detail here. Should you require further explanations, consult
such texts as The Offering Garland by our precious teacher.[23]

iii. Satisfying the Hordes of Spirits with the Torma

When giving the torma to spirits that have not received the empowerment, the torma must be covered
with a cloth as it is carried outside. The torma offered to those spirits who have
received the empowerment does not need to be covered by such a cloth. Perform the torma offering
ritual for the supermundane deities according to the respective tantra of your practice,
such as the Hevajra or Cakrasaṃvara. To offer the torma for the mundane deities to the
dharmapālas, follow the ritual as given in the respective practice text. Next, give the
general torma of the ḍākinīs to all the spirits. Then, when giving the torma of the local
deities and the other tormas, focus on the recipients of the tormas and recite the mantra
for giving the torma that begins, "oṃ akāro...".[24] All the spirits will thereby become
delighted and satisfied. The torma ritual itself is explained in detail in other texts.

iv. Satisfying the Samaya-Holders, the Vīras and Yoginīs

To satisfy the samaya-holders, the vīras and yoginīs, present them with offerings of the five
sensory pleasures, such as flowers and so forth. As regards the feast articles, there are
two traditions: one for those who have taken ordination and observe the precepts, and one
for yogins. According to the first, the ordained should merely taste[25] the offerings and
tormas that contain substances such as meat and alcohol. Furthermore, they bless the tormas
containing sugar, fruits and other clean substances, and consume them while imagining
that they contain the five meats and five amṛtas. This way none of the thirteen root downfalls
can occur and the buddhas, bodhisattvas and wisdom ḍākinīs will bestow their blessings.
The Guhyasamāja states:

Although the substances do not even contain meatCreate all the substances through your imagination.When
these are consumed joined with the vajra,All the buddhas will grant their blessings.


The Sampuṭa also states:

Although it is not meat, imagine it to be meat.Whatever worldly people eat is consumed.[26]


This is the tradition of practicing the gaṇacakra according to the master Āryadeva, who was
the spiritual heir of the Indian master Nāgārjuna, and according to Asaṅga and Vasubandhu,
the great lord Atiśa, my learned teacher Śākyaśrībhadra, and others. It is excellent, therefore,
for the ordained to perform the gaṇacakra in this way on such occasions as empowerments.

For the yogins’ tradition of practicing gaṇacakra, cleanse as before whatever samaya substances
you can acquire, such as madana, bala, and so forth. Sprinkle the substances with cleansing
water while reciting "oṃ āḥ hūṃ ha ho hrīḥ." Imagine that with ha their appearance becomes
irresistible, with ho their aroma becomes irresistible, and with hrīḥ their potency
becomes irrepressible. With oṃ, āḥ, and hūṃ, they transform into wisdom nectar. Pour a little
bit of madana for each participant, but imagine that everyone drinks it from the same
bowl.

Then, present the main offerings to the master and the maṇḍala. Next, offer whatever tormas
you have prepared. If an empowerment is to be given, the master will now practice the maṇḍala
of the tathāgatas.[27] During meditative equipoise, he will maintain the generation and
completion phases of the maṇḍala of the tathāgatas and make offerings to the deities of
consecration. All recipients of the torma, including any spirits, should be seen as buddhas
when given the offerings. If not, it is said that the fault of 'a king worshipping his servants'
or 'a monk worshipping the householders' will occur.

Doing this correctly will create the auspicious circumstances for the buddhas to be delighted
and the spirits to be satisfied. Next, pour madana into the padma-bhājana and with your
left ring finger take some bala and perform the lotus mudrā. Hold the padma-bhājana in your
right hand while partially covering it with your left hand and offer it. The recipients
likewise perform the lotus mudrā and then receive it. As the Two Segments states:

Offered with lotus hands,
It is received with lotus hands.

The leader then recites:

Behold all phenomena as excellent!Have no doubts regarding all that is gathered.Eat and regard
brahmins, dogs, and untouchablesAs equal in nature!

The recipients reply:

The teaching of the Sugata is priceless!With devotion I pay homage to suchness,Which is free
from stains such as passion,And devoid of grasper and grasped.

You should know the meaning of these verses. While the leader and the recipients then both say
"aho sukha" the offerings are distributed. These verses, which derive from the Sampuṭa-tantra,
were originally composed in Prakrit not Sanskrit.[28] Since they were difficult for
the lotsāwas to comprehend, a few translation errors occurred. The translation above, however,
is flawless.

Next imagine that you bless the offerings as before and enjoy them as an offering to the maṇḍala.
Practitioners of Cakrasaṃvara should now perform the 'hand worship.'[29] The significance
of receiving from the same bowl is explained in the Two Segments, while different bowls
are used according to the Sampuṭa.

The ritual assistant should not put the primary bowl directly on the ground without a support
until all the students have received the offerings. There is however no fault in putting
the bowl on the floor after the vajra students have received the offerings. Once you have
distributed the offerings, do not turn the bowl upside down until you leave. Do not leave
the bowl empty either. It is auspicious to leave just a little food and drink in the bowl.

Do not argue or joke about during the gaṇacakra. Discuss only what delights the mind or is on
the subject of Dharma. Do not leave the assembly without permission from the guru or the
assembly. Do not become intoxicated. Do not allow ordinary perception to take over. Do not
forget to maintain the perception of the yidam deity. Do not entertain thoughts about samaya-holders
being good or bad, or harbour concepts regarding the purity or impurity of the
blessed substances. Instructions such as these on proper and improper behaviour may be found
in the gaṇacakra commentaries called the Five Samayas and Advice on the Uncommon Meaning
and elsewhere.[30]

When a beginner or someone with a steady mind practices the gaṇacakra conduct in one of the
twenty-four sacred places but fails to communicate with secret signs, the wisdom ḍākinīs will
not confer blessings and the activity ḍākinīs will create obstacles. The Two Segments
states:

O mahāsattva Vajragarbha,The secret language is wondrous.Whatever I teach you,You must retain
with devotion.Once you have received the Hevajra empowerment,If you do not use the secret
language,Your samayas will decline.There is no doubt about this.

And:

After you have received the specific samayas,If you do not employ the language,The ḍākinīs of
the four sacred placesWill show you their wrath within this lifetime.

Similar statements are to be found in all the tantras, including the Cakrasaṃvara and others.
Gain expertise, therefore, in the secret language: madana means alcohol; bala means meat;
tṛptikara are foods such as grains; tīndhana are vegetables and herbs; padma-bhājana is
a skull, and even if the vessel is not a skull, you should visualize it as a skull and call
it padma-bhājana; kṛpīta is a hand-drum; kāliñjara are those who have received the empowerment
and uphold the samayas; dundura are those who have not received the empowerment and
do not uphold the samayas; preṅkhaṇa means arriving; kheṭa means going; and, niraṃśuka refers
to bone ornaments. These are some of the secret words to be used.[31]

Men are referred to with the syllable ḍa, and women with the syllable ḍī. These are two samples
of the secret signs that are to be used.[32] The practitioner should gain expertise in
the secret language taught in the Hevajra and Cakrasaṃvara. The tantras teach that if you
do not know the secret language obstacles will arise when practicing the gaṇacakra and when
traveling to the twenty-four sacred sites. But those who do know the secret language will
swiftly reap the siddhis.

v. Satisfying with the Offering of Song and Dance

Offering a song or dance will attract the wisdom ḍākinīs, stabilize the visualization of the
maṇḍala of the tathāgatas and provide protection for oneself and those assembled. If a man
offers a song, he should generate the vajra pride of being Amitāyus, and if he offers a
dance, he should generate the vajra pride of being Vairocana. If a woman offers a song, she
should generate the vajra pride of being Pāṇḍaravāsinī, and if she offers a dance, she should
generate the vajra pride of being Buddhalocana. The Two Segments states:

Vajradharma and Buddhalocana,The yoginīs and matṛkās,Should perfectly performBoth song and dance.This
will protect the assemblyAnd oneself as well.It will magnetize the worldAnd complete
the mantra recitation.

When the vīras and yoginīs who hold the samaya perform song and dance, there will be the scent
of garlic, vultures, camphor, or sandalwood, and the sounds of swans, bees, and wolves.
These signs indicate that the wisdom ḍākinīs have gathered, according to Hevajra.

vi. Satisfying with Co-Emergent Wisdom

If the vīras are practitioners of the Path of the Messenger[33] and are able to retain the winds,
they can perform the actual practice of the Path of the Messenger at this point. However,
if they do not practice the Path of the Messenger and are unable to retain the winds,
they can sprinkle a little bit of butter, ghee, or madana on their heart centre and simply
rest in meditative equipoise while visualizing themselves as the heruka in union, with
their guru resting on their crowns, and while recollecting that all appearances are the maṇḍala
of the tathāgatas. Thus, rest in the samādhi of bliss and emptiness. The master Ḍombi
Heruka said:

Thus apply butter and ghee
To your heart.

This concludes the explanation of the main part, the six satisfactions.

c) Conclusion of the Ritual

i. The remainder is offered to entrust the outer spirits with activities;ii. Prayers of dedication
and auspiciousness are recited for the wisdom ḍākinīs to remain present;iii. The hundred-syllable
mantra is recited to make up for additions or omissions to the ritual;iv. Aspiration
prayers are recited so that accumulated merit bears the right fruition;v. The guests
of the front visualization are requested to depart and the torma is dispatched;vi. Protection
is established and after the ritual, the visualiztion is disolved.

i. Offering the Remainder

Place the remainder torma in the front and put a little madana in your mouth. Pick up the remainder
with the 'blazing hand mudrā' while saying bhrūṃ or pheṃ and spit on it.[34] Bless
it with the three syllables—oṃ, aḥ and hūṃ—and recite the mantra "oṃ akāro mukhaṃ sarvadharmānām
ādyanutpannatvāt oṃ āḥ hūṃ phaṭ svāhā." Alternatively, recite "oṃ ucchiṣṭa-baliṅgte
bhakṣasi svāhā." Repeat these mantras three or seven times. Imagine that all the spirits
who receive the remainder are thereby satisfied.

ii. Prayers of Dedication and Auspiciousness

In order for the wisdom ḍākinīs to remain present and grant their blessings and auspiciousness,
hold the vajra and bell and recite the vajra song that begins "kollaire ṭṭia..."[35] as
well as such prayers of auspiciousness as "Apparent magnificence, like a mountain of gold…”
etc.[36] At this point it is not permissible to chant songs and verses of auspiciousness
that were composed by ordinary people, only songs and verses of auspiciousness spoken by
the buddhas. Still, there is no fault in chanting such songs and verses of auspiciousness
before gathering the remainder inside and offering the torma.

Mix the select portion with the remainder[37] and dispose of them somewhere outside, such as
at a crossroad. According to the Sampuṭa, you should draw a maṇḍala with the toe of your
right foot, play the ḍamaru made of two skulls, and say the name of the ḍākinī whom you entrust
with activities together with "phreṃ hūṃ." For example, if you entrust Taraṅgiṇī with
activities, say "Taraṅgiṇī! Phreṃ hūṃ!" Then dispose of the torma outside, and chant vajra
songs and verses of auspiciousness inside, so that the wisdom ḍākiṇīs gather.

Furthermore, to guard against the evil influences of shadow spirits,[38] place a candle next
to the torma and only then dispose of it. Praises to the dharmapālas, entrustment with activities,
offerings made by the sponsors, and prayers for auspiciousness should be recited
before offering the remainder torma. Rituals for restoring the samayas can be done at this
point or together with offering the torma to the supermundane guests. The remaining activities
are to be performed afterwards.

iii. Recitation of the Hundred-Syllable Mantra

To make up for additions or omissions to the ritual, physically join your vajra palms at your
heart and mentally confess all wrongdoing. Imagine that all additions or omissions to the
ritual are remedied thereby while reciting the hundred-syllable mantra. Then recite aloud
the verses that begin:

In my ignorance and delusionI have gone against and corrupted my samaya.Lama protector, be my
refuge![39]...

And:

For anything lacking or incomplete,For any mistakes I made or had others make,Due to my ignorance
and confusion,Protectors, please forgive them all!

And:

Whatever mistakes I, a mere beginner, may have committed—such as unclear samādhi, a dull or
agitated mind, improper performance of the ritual, impure substances, excess or decline—please
forgive them all, I pray!

iv. Recitation of Aspiration Prayers for the Accumulated Merit to Bear the Right Fruition

Join your vajra palms at your heart, and recite the following verses from the Hevajra:

In this life and all my lives to come,May I always be born into a noble family and uphold the
samayas.With my senses intact, may I receive and teach the Hevajra,And be kind-hearted and
devoted to my teacher!In this life and all my lives to come,May I always bear the vajra
and bell,Understand the profound Dharma,And enjoy with equality the essence of women.

Also recite the following verse from the Cakrasaṃvara:

Goddesses are the truth as samayas are the truth.Thus their speech is likewise the highest truth.By
the power of the truth of this practice,May the goddesses always care for me!

Recite this verse from the Sampuṭa as well:

May all beings be happy!May all beings be well!May they traverse the pathBy which they will
attain awakening![40]

Recite these and other aspiration prayers found in the tantras. Then recite whatever dedication
prayers you know from the sūtras, such as "Just as the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī attained omniscience..."[41]
Thus dedicate the merit extensively with a mind free from the three spheres
and mental poisons. Depending upon the occasion, you could also add prayers aspiring
to a long life, good health, prosperity and good fortune, or whatever you desire.

v. Requesting the Guests of the Front Visualization to Depart

Recite the hundred-syllable mantra followed by:

Oṃ! You who've served all beings:Grant us the respective siddhis!Even though you now depart
for your buddha realm,I pray that you may return.

With this verse the jñānasattvas of the front visualization are requested to depart and the
visualization dissolves into you. You do not need to request the jñānasattvas of the self-visualization
to depart according to the Mahāyoga tradition.

vi. The Protection and the Dissolution after the Ritual

According to the Hevajra, bringing to mind the Heruka of the session breaks will bless your
sense faculties and their objects as well as your body, speech and mind. According to the
Cakrasaṃvara, reciting the sumbhani-mantra[42] and snapping your fingers ensure that you are
guarded everywhere and protected by the armour of the male and female vīras, and by the
great armour. Seal the practice with the eight-part mantra[43] and dissolve the main visualization
after the ritual.[44] Then rest as you like. This concludes the explanation of the
conclusion of the ritual.

6. Necessity

All the accumulations of merit and wisdom are included within this ritual. The Vajra Tent states:[45]

This is the vajra-like samādhi of the oceanic accumulation of merit and wisdom.

It is called "the vajra delight"[46] and so forth, since it pleases the buddhas, the bodhisattvas
abiding on the ten bhūmis, the eight types of śrāvakas, the dull and sharp pratekyabuddhas,
the worldly gods of the desire, form and formless realms, the protectors and guardians
of the Dharma, the worldly guests such as hell-beings and pretas, and all the supermundane
guests. They are all pleased and fully satisfied. The Vajra Tent elaborates upon this
further. However, this will not be shared here and those who are interested can read the
tantra itself. The ritual will likewise bring about all the worldly and transcendent siddhis.
The Two Segments states:

Whatever one eats, all the sensual delightsWill transform into siddhis for practitioners.

The tantras also speak of the ritual's countless further benefits, so you can consult these
scriptural sources directly.

II. Refutation of Objections

This consists of three points:

View
Meditation
Conduct

Some noble śrāvakas believe that first, the view of the Mahāyāna is at fault. They argue that
while the Mahāyāna establishes form and the rest as valid cognitions, the Prajñāpāramitā
states that "there is no form, no sensation…etc., up to and including "no omniscient Buddha."[47]
Therefore, our scriptures and reasoning contradict one another.

Second, they claim that meditation is at fault, since an ordinary person's body, speech, and
mind will not become those of a buddha simply by meditating upon them as being the buddha.

Third, they believe conduct to be at fault, since the Mahāyāna states that the conduct of an
ordained person's body and speech must be pure, but also states that pure and impure are
equal.

Let us respond to these objections.

1. View

Regarding the view of emptiness, there is no fault. While you would be correct if we negated
appearances, such as form, there is no fault in the Mahāyāna, since we negate their true
existence. The elaborate answer to this is provided in Mahāyāna scriptures such as The Ornament
of Sūtras in its chapter on "Establishing the Buddha's Words".[48]

2. Meditation

Second, the meditation is not at fault. Meditating on the pervasiveness of earth, for example,
will give rise to the corresponding samādhi of the earth and so forth.[49] Likewise, meditating
on your yidam deity will bring about the samādhi of the yidam deity. Similarly, when
the śrāvakas imagine skeletons, for example, in their meditation their perception changes
accordingly.

3. Conduct

Third, regarding Mahāyāna conduct, there are three objections to be refuted with regard to:

a) The object of veneration
b) Time
c) Substances

a) Object of Veneration

Some śrāvakas say that it is illogical to worship the buddhas by making offerings to oneself.
Our bodies are made of impure substances and our minds are filled with anger and attachment.
If that were the case, it would also be illogical to make offerings to statues or paintings
(as they do), since the artist has anger and attachment, and the paint too is made
of impure elements. Nevertheless, it is stated in the sūtras that merit is obtained by venerating
them in the belief that they are buddhas. Meditating upon oneself as a buddha and
making offerings therefore yields the merit of making offerings to the buddhas. This is stated
in both the sūtras and tantras. As Maitreya's Lion's Roar says:[50]

Whoever wishes to worship the Buddha should worship oneself.Whoever wishes to worship the relics
of the Buddha should worship oneself.

The Tantra Purifying Evil Destinies states:[51]

If, when you assume the being of Vajrasattva,Whatever you eat or doIs unstained by any fault,What
need is there to speak of having compassion?

Since this is likewise explained in detail other tantras, for the sake of brevity I will not
elaborate further.

b) Time

Some assert that the time for offering to the buddhas is in the morning and that to offer in
the evening is illogical. Yet when the deities gather on auspicious days, such as the eighth
day of the lunar month, you [śrāvakas] consider that a good time to make offerings. In
the same way, since the wisdom ḍākinīs gather at night, the evenings present an auspicious
occasion. As the Vajraḍāka states:[52]

The women of this landWill grant siddhis to the practitioners.Always active during the night,Always
gathering during the night.Great celestial accomplishments,So difficult to obtain,
will be granted.

The Secret Tantra of the Common Procedures states:[53]

Since the deities gather at sunset,It is certainly a sacred occasion.Thus it is virtuous to
offer to themAnd request their departure before sunrise.

The night is therefore said to be a sacred time when blessings are conferred.

Moreover, regarding the downfalls of the śrāvakas, there are those that consider matter as primary
and those that consider perception as primary. Since the sole reference is the mind
that thinks of morning and evening, polluted and unpolluted, killing and stealing and so
forth, of the two, perception is clearly the more important. Thus there is no fault in eating
in the evening if you are able to maintain the perception that it is morning, whereas
there is a fault in eating in the morning if you maintain the perception that it is evening.
If you maintain the perception that women are men, there is no fault in touching them,
whereas there is a fault in touching men if you maintain the perception that they are women.
Although you know that they are women, if you are able to fully control your perception,
it is possible to avoid the corresponding downfalls. The Ratnakūṭa states:[54]

The bodhisattva Gaṇapravara[55] using the door of Dharma in which the external element is one
with the internal earth element,[56] took the hand of a women and sat upon a seat. In that
moment, Ānanda developed a lack of faith. Gaṇapravara then displayed a miracle, which dispelled
Ānanda's misconceptions. Thus, there was no downfall in this case.

Likewise, if you meditate on the garuḍa, then even if you consume poison the toxins will not
affect you. If you engage in rejuvenation practice (rasāyana) without knowing how to practice
it, it will prove fatal. Similarly, if you know how to meditate on the maṇḍala of the
tathāgatas, consuming food will become a cause for buddhahood, while not knowing this will
become a cause for rebirth in the lower realms. This was confirmed by the master Āryadeva,
who said:

By meditating on the garuḍa,
You will be able to consume any poison.

It is also said:

Even a small lump of ironWill sink to the bottom of the sea.However, if you mould it into a
vessel,It can become a ship that carries you to liberation.

c) Substances

i. Refutation of Objections Regarding Foods and Drinks

Some śrāvakas maintain that the offerings to the Buddha should consist of such pure substances
as the three whites and three sweets, while impure substances like meat and alcohol should
not be offered. Substances like the three whites, three sweets and water are indeed virtuous
and pure offerings for the Buddha. Offerings to the wisdom ḍākinīs, however, require
meat and alcohol, in order that the auspicious circumstances may be created for attracting
the wisdom ḍākinīs. You need water to attract swans, flowers to attract bees, and meat
to attract flies. If you lack knowledge, substances such as mercury and calcareous sinter
may harm you, but if you know how to use them, they can become substances of rejuvenation
and cause your lifespan to rival that of the sun and moon. Similarly, if you do not know the
nature of the five meats and five amṛtas, they will become a cause for rebirth in the lower
realms, but if you do know, they will become a cause for buddhahood. Using the three
medicinal fruits[57] in rejuvenation practice cannot kill you, just as it cannot enable you
to live as long as the sun and the moon. Substances such as the three sweets, when consumed,
cannot lead to the hell realms, just as they cannot serve as causes for buddhahod. The
master Ravigupta said:

If someone is able to harm you,He is also able to help you,Like the sun which causes both drought
and rain.The moon does not have this capacity.

Likewise, the five meats and five amṛtas are easy to find and not unwholesome. They are blessed
by the wisdom ḍākinīs and said to be endowed with the three qualities.

ii. Refutation of Objections Regarding Vessels and Decoration

Some śrāvakas state that it is best to use vessels made from oyster or conch shells and decorations
using pearls and ivory. And for textiles, it is best to use silk. They ask if it is
not inappropriate to use such extremely impure objects as skulls for vessels, human bone
for decoration, and human hair for thread.

In response, I would ask whether human or animals are better.[58] If the response is that a
human body is far better since it results from merit, whereas an animal body results from
non-virtue and is therefore inferior, I would ask why hair and bones that are produced by
merit are bad while bones produced by non-virtue are good. Put your mind at ease! Tantras
such as the Cakrasaṃvara state:

If conch, oysters and pearlsAre the result of the causes,[59]Who would criticize the use of
skullsFrom the form of the dharmakāya?For heroes, wearing a skull garlandAnd necklace of bones[60]
as a means of purificationIs said to be a stage of the sacred Dharma.

Thus, my teacher, the great Vajradhara in person,[61] said, "The view, meditation and conduct
of the Secret Mantra are entirely established by logic based on facts." The extensive logical
arguments and scriptural citations that establish the validity of the Secret Mantra
vehicle can be found in such works as those by the noble teachers Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva,
the master Buddhajñānapāda's Introduction to the Art of Self-Accomplishment,[62] and the master
Śāntarakṣita's Establishing Suchness.[63]

III. Distinctions of the Ritual[64]

The participants
The occasions
The deity yogas
The purposes
The objects of offering

1. Participants

When both vīras and yoginīs gather together that is called a ‘gaṇacakra'. If only vīras gather,
it is called a 'vīras' feast'; wheras if only yoginīs gather, it is called called a 'yoginīs'
feast'.

2. Occasions

When performing an empowerment or a consecration, or a fire offering it is called a caru banquet.[65]

3. Deity Yogas

If the gathering consists of varying practitioners of different deity yogas, such as Hevajra
or the Cakrasaṃvara, it is called a 'gathering of friends'.

4. Purposes

All the maṇḍala deities adopt the dancing posture to invoke the compassion of the buddhas so
that all the harm in the world may be pacified. When the combination of song and dance causes
the wrathful kings to laugh and the dance of mind invokes the wisdom minds of the buddhas,
pacifying beings’ suffering, it is called 'the dance of the buddhas'.

5. Objects of Offering

The women who are supports for the worldly and the world-transcending ḍākinīs are marked by
symbols such as a skull or an axe. The consort who is offered to the leader of the ritual
should possess the proper characteristics. The women are to be offered within the maṇḍala
house. Gather the requisite number of virgins, corresponding to the number of deities in the
maṇḍala—whether five, seven or thirty-seven—in front of the curtains of the maṇḍala house.
Serve them food, drink and clothing. This is called 'the feast of maidens’.

This concludes my explanation of the stages of the practice of the great and glorious Sakyapa,
kings of dharma, based on the niruttarayoga tantras, the commentaries of the siddhas, and
the pith instructions of the gurus.

The Vajradhara in human form,Who upholds the lineage of accomplished gurus,And resides at the
seat of the Sakyas, extracted and taught this ritualIn accord with the meaning of the stainless
tantras.[66]Since his perfect explanation was a little unclear to some,At the request
of several supplicants,The one named Kunga,Who revered the dust at his feet,Composed this
clarification.

Through this virtue,May all infinite beings, as vast as space,Swiftly perfect the accumulations
of merit and wisdomAnd within this life reach the state of Vajradhara.

Thus, at the request of supplicants, the glorious Sakya Paṇḍita further clarified the teaching
on the stages of practice of the gaṇacakra according to the niruttarayoga tantras by the
Dharma-King who is adorned by a crowning Victory Banner (Gyaltsen).[67]

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang, ed. Maitri Yarnell), 2021. Many thanks to
Ryan Conlon for kindly providing suggestions and clarifications.